Update the redis to valkey migration guide - migration.md (#247)
valkey-io/valkey-doc: topics/migration.md

> 

Reviewer: Oops, an empty line at the top. I don't know if it renders correctly in man page and webite. My guess is that the metadata stuff starting with `---` needs to be at the very top.

```suggestion
```

Author: Removed line.

Valkey is compatible with Redis OSS 7.2 and all earlier open source Redis versions.
Migrating from any open source Redis version to Valkey is effectively an upgrade.
Redis Community Edition (CE), versions 7.4 and later, are not open source and the data files are not compatible with Valkey.

> It may be possible to migrate the data to Valkey from proprietary Redis versions and other Redis-like software, but it requires another method and is not covered by this document.

Author: From other comments, they just want to keep this simple. Which is why I removed the BGSAVE steps and just kept using the SAVE command. I did add the comma.

    
    ```
    $ docker inspect -f '{{range.NetworkSettings.Networks}}{{.IPAddress}}{{end}}' myvalkey
    172.21.0.3
    ```

3. Start the `valkey-cli` in your Valkey container and get the database number using the `INFO KEYSPACE` command. In this example, the database number is `0` (db0).
   
   ```
   valkey 127.0.0.1:6379> INFO KEYSPACE
   # Keyspace
   db0:keys=3,expires=0,avg_ttl=0
   ```
    > NOTE: If you haven't migrated or added any data to your Valkey database, then the `INFO KEYSPACE` command will not return any database number. You can use `0` for the `MIGRATE` command in step 4.
   
4. From the Redis server, run the `MIGRATE` command:
    ```
    MIGRATE valkey-ip valkey-port <key | ""> valkey-db-number timeout-value [COPY] [REPLACE] [AUTH password | AUTH2 username password] [KEYS key [key ...]]
    ```
    For example, to migrate the `message` and `mydata` keys to the Valkey instance with the IP address 172.21.0.3 and port 6379, the command would look similar to:

    ```
    redis 127.0.0.1:6379> MIGRATE 172.21.0.3 6379 "" 0 10 COPY REPLACE KEYS message mydata
    ```
    
   where:

>    - `""` = Indicates that we are migrating multiple keys. You would use `key` if you were only migrating a single key.

Reviewer: It's possible to use `""` and the separate `KEYS` argument also for a single key, so I think we can write "can" instead of "would" here.

```suggestion
   - `""` = Indicates that we are migrating multiple keys. You can use the key name here if you're only migrating a single key.
```

Author: Made the change.

The example migration steps are provided for Redis 7.2.5 and Valkey version 7.2.6. 

Note that Redis and Valkey Docker containers are considered stand-alone servers, if they are not part of a cluster.

### Physical migration

This is the easiest and fastest migration method. You make a fresh snapshot of your Redis instance and copy it over to Valkey. Valkey reads the data from the snapshot on startup and restores its contents into memory. The tradeoffs for this method are:

* The downtime to shutdown Redis and wait for Valkey to load the data. 
* Potential risk of data loss on instances with heavy writes. To prevent it, you must disconnect all active connections before starting the migration.

To perform a physical migration:

1. Disconnect all active connections to the Redis instance.

> 2. In your Redis container, connect to `redis-cli` and check the number of keys, using the `INFO KEYSPACE` command. This will be used later to verify that the entire database has been successfully migrated. In this example, `keys=6286` indicates that there are 6.286 keys in the database.

Reviewer: "Connect to `redis-cli`" is not right. `redis-cli` is a program that you run.

How about "Connect using `redis-cli`"?

> 2. In your Redis container, connect to `redis-cli` and check the number of keys, using the `INFO KEYSPACE` command. This will be used later to verify that the entire database has been successfully migrated. In this example, `keys=6286` indicates that there are 6.286 keys in the database.

Author: I made the change for 6,286. I also rewrote the "connection" sentence to the following:  " Connect to your Redis container using `redis-cli`, and check the number of keys, using the `INFO KEYSPACE` command."

      db0:keys=6286,expires=0,avg_ttl=0
      ```
    
3. Check the configuration for the directory (`dir`) where Redis stores its database files and the name of the database file (`dbfilename`). In this example, Redis saves the backup into the `/data/dump.rdb` file

> 	> NOTE: If your Redis Docker container `/data` directory is mounted to a directory on your host, the RDB file is also written to that host directory.

Reviewer: Please use spaces, not tabs.

There are many tabs in this change, not only on this line.

Author: Changed all tabs to spaces.

    ```
    redis 127.0.0.1:6379> CONFIG GET dir dbfilename
    1) "dir"
    2) "/data"
    3) "dbfilename"
    4) "dump.rdb"
    ```

> 4. Create the backup file. You can either use the `redis-cli` [SAVE](https://redis.io/docs/latest/commands/save/) command or the [BGSAVE](https://redis.io/docs/latest/commands/bgsave/) command to create the backup file. The `SAVE` command performs a synchronous save, blocking all the other clients. However, the `BGSAVE` does the save in the background, forking a child to save the DB, allowing the parent to continue serving the clients. 

Author: I removed the BGSAVE and just kept the SAVE.

	> NOTE: BGSAVE is usually used for production environments.

	- Using `BGSAVE`
	

> 		a.  Check the timestamp of the last save operation, using the [LASTSAVE](https://redis.io/docs/latest/commands/lastsave/) comamnd.

Reviewer: Link to commands using relative links to the md file as in this repo, like `[LASTSAVE](../commands/lastsave.md)`.

These docs are not only used for the website. They are also used for man pages.

Relative links like these also work when you click on them in the github web view.

Author: I changed all the Valkey doc references to be relative. That makes sense because the migration guide is in the Valkey repository. But did you also want the redis.io/docs/ links to point to the Valkey versions? Or do you want to leave them as they are now, pointing to the redis documentaiton?

Reviewer: Oh, these are links to Redis docs. I didn't notice at first.

But yeah, I think we should change these too, to link to Valkey docs. We avoid linking to Redis website since it contains some non-open-source stuff that we don't want to promote. And since this doc is for users coming from Redis, they probably already know about those docs and they need to learn about Valkey's docs.

These commands behave exactly the same in Redis and Valkey and the docs are identical too I believe.

Author: Changed all Redis references to point to the Valkey documentation.

      ```
      redis 127.0.0.1:6379> LASTSAVE
      (integer) 1724764878
      ```

		b. Start the save operation.

	   ```
      redis 127.0.0.1:6379> BGSAVE
      Background saving started
      ```

		c. Rerun `LASTSAVE` periodically until the timestamp changes, indicating the backup is complete.

	- Using `SAVE`

		Start the save operation. 

      ```
		redis 127.0.0.1:6379> SAVE
		OK

>       ```

Reviewer: There is excessive indentation here. The example should be indented the same as the triple backticks. Otherwise, a lot of spaces will be part of the example which is not what the CLI looks like.

Author: Took out extra spaces.

5. Exit  `redis-cli` by pressing `CTRL-D` or typing `exit`.
6. Create a directory on your host to which you will mount the `/data` directory of the Valkey container.
7. Copy the RDB file from Redis to Valkey, using one of the following:

> 	- Redis container mounted to host directory: 

Author: Made the change.

> 	- Redis container mounted to host directory: 

Author: Changed it to, "If the Redis and Valkey containers are both mounted to a host directory: "

        Copy the RDB file from the host directory mounted to the Redis container to the host directory being mounted to the Valkey container.

> 	- Redis container not mounted to host directory:

Author: So the example as shown, uses docker cp to copy the saved backup file out of the Redis container to the host directory that will be mounted to the Valkey container /data directory.  If you want both Redis and Valkey to not be mounted to a host directory, then the example needs another docker cp to copy it from some host directory to the /data directory of the Valkey container. But I tried that, and I couldn't get it to work,

> 	- Redis container not mounted to host directory:

Author: Changed text to:

   - If the Redis container is not mounted to a host directory but the Valkey container is:

	
		Use `docker cp` to copy the RDB file from within the Redis container to the host directory that will be mounted to your Valkey container.

		> NOTE: You may also want to copy the RDB file to a second location as a backup.

      ```
	   docker cp <Redis_container_name>:/<dir>/<dbfilename> <path/on/host>:<dir>/<dbfilename>
      ```

8. Stop the Redis server.
9. Start Valkey:

   > NOTE: If you enabled AOF in your Valkey configuration, disable it on the first start. Otherwise, the copied RDB file will not be imported into Valkey.

   Run the following command:

   ```
	docker run -d --name <Valkey_container_name> -v <path/on/host>:<path/in/Valkey/container> <image_name>
   
   ```

>    In this example, the container is named, `somevalkey` and the image name is `valkey/valkey`. It is mounting whatever is set as the directory path on the host to the Docker container `/data` directory.    

Author: Removed partial example.

   ```
   $ docker run -d --name somevalkey -v <path/on/host>:/data valkey/valkey
   ```

10. To verify that the data has been successfully migrated, determine the number of keys in the Valkey database. If the migration is successful, then the number of keys in the Valkey database match the number of keys in the Redis database that you obtained in step 2:

>       ```

Reviewer: Please revert these unnecessary changes to spaces.

   ```
   docker container ls
   CONTAINER ID   ...     PORTS      NAMES
   bffc575f261a   ...     6379/tcp   myvalkey
   ab18318ce820   ...     6379/tcp   myredis
   ```
   
3. Connect to your Valkey container and start the `valkey-cli` to configure replication using the [REPLICAOF](https://valkey.io/commands/replicaof/) command. In this example, the Redis IP address is `172.17.0.2` and the port is `6379`. Replace with the IP address and port of your Redis container obtained in steps 1 and 2.

   ```
   docker exec -it myvalkey valkey-cli
   valkey 127.0.0.1:6379> REPLICAOF 172.17.0.2 6379
   OK
   ```
   
4. Check the replication status in Valkey using the `INFO REPLICATION` command. If `master_link_status:up` is present, then the Redis and Valkey servers are synchronized. [INFO Command](https://valkey.io/commands/info/) desribes the different output fields.

    ```
    valkey 127.0.0.1:6379> INFO REPLICATION
    # Replication
    role:slave
    master_host:172.17.0.2
    master_port:6379
    master_link_status:up
    master_last_io_seconds_ago:4
    master_sync_in_progress:0
    ....
    ```

> 5. Once Redis and Valkey are synchronized, verify that your applications connect to Valkey and shut down your Redis instance. 

Author: Added the following note:    > NOTE: Since the Redis 7.0 release, the `shutdown` command waits for a time period, set by the `shutdown-timeout` configuration variable, for any lagging replicas to sync. There may be potential data loss in the case where there are writes active on the Redis primary while it is syncing with the replica.

There may be cases when you need to migrate only a specific set of critical keys. 
The `redis-cli` command, [MIGRATE](https://redis.io/docs/latest/commands/migrate/) is used to migrate one or more keys.

Requirements for this example:

- The Redis and Valkey Docker containers are on the same network and can communicate with each other.

- The Redis and Valkey containers are running without authentication.

Perform the following steps:

1. Determine the keys you wish to migrate. In this example, the `message` and  `mydata` keys are being migrated from the `myredis` container, and the `redis-cli` is used to view their current values.
   
    ```
    $ docker exec -it myredis redis-cli
    redis 127.0.0.1:6379> GET message
    "Hello Valkey"
    redis 127.0.0.1:6379> HGETALL  mydata
    1) "name"
    2) "Alice"
    3) "age"
    4) "33"
    5) "country"
    6) "Brazil"
    7) "favorite food"
    8) "beans"
    ```

2. Retrieve the IP address of your Valkey container. Replace `myvalkey` with the name of your Valkey container.
    
    ```
    $ docker inspect -f '{{range.NetworkSettings.Networks}}{{.IPAddress}}{{end}}' myvalkey
    172.21.0.3
    ```

> 3. Start the `valkey-cli` in your Valkey container and get the database number using the `INFO KEYSPACE` command. In this example, the database number is `0` (db0).

Author: What are we assuming is the experience level of those doing these migrations?  I as a new user needed to run this command to see what the database number was in my Valkey container, as I just used the default configuration file.

   
   ```
   valkey 127.0.0.1:6379> INFO KEYSPACE
   # Keyspace
   db0:keys=3,expires=0,avg_ttl=0
   ```
    > NOTE: If you haven't migrated or added any data to your Valkey database, then the `INFO KEYSPACE` command will not return any database number. You can use `0` for the `MIGRATE` command in step 4.
   
4. From the Redis server, run the `MIGRATE` command:
     ```

>      MIGRATE <Valkey_IP> <Valkey_port> <key | ""> <Valkey-db-number> <timeout> [COPY] [REPLACE] [AUTH password | AUTH2 username password] [KEYS key [key ...]]

Reviewer: This is a mix of different ways to write syntax. Some placeholders use `<name>` and some just `name`.

In general, we don't use `<name>` for placeholders. We just write them as `name` in lowercase and we write fixed strings in uppercase.

We do use `<` and `>` for grouping meaning one of multiple alternatives, for example `<key | "">` meaning either a key or "".

Preferred style:

`MIGRATE valkey-ip valkey-port <key | ""> valkey-db-number timeout [COPY]` ...

Author: Changed all instances. I did leave <path/on/host> and similar directory paths in commands, as they were originally there. Did you want me to changed them as well?

Reviewer: Ah, fine, no need to change old stuff.

    appendonly yes
    ```

3. Start a Valkey instance with your custom configuration file. The following command starts Valkey in Docker: 

    ```
    $ docker run  -d -v myvalkey/conf:/usr/local/etc/valkey --name valkey-1 --net mynetwork valkey/valkey valkey-server /usr/local/etc/valkey/valkey.conf
    ```

   where:
   * `myvalkey/conf` is a local directory containing your `valkey.conf` configuration file that is being mapped to the `/usr/local/etc/valkey` directory within the Docker Valkey container.
   * `valkey-1` is the name of your container
   * `mynetwork` is the name of the network where Redis cluster is running.
   * `valkey/valkey` is the name of the Valkey image

4. Retrieve the IP address of the Valkey instance; replacing `valkey-1` with the name of your container.

    ```

>     $ docker inspect -f '{{range.NetworkSettings.Networks}}{{.IPAddress}}{{end}}' valkey-1    

Reviewer: Don't add this trailing whitespace

Author: Removed all trailing white spaces.

    ```

5. Add your new Valkey node to the Redis Cluster as a replica. Replace placeholders in angle brackets (`<>`) with your values:

    ``` 
    $ docker exec -it <redis-1> bash
    $ redis-cli --cluster add-node <valkey-node-IP>:6379 <existing-node-IP>:6379 --cluster-replica
    ```

> 6. Check the cluster status. The output of the cluster nodes command is described in [CLUSTER NODES](https://redis.io/docs/latest/commands/cluster-nodes/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Check the cluster status. The output of the cluster nodes command is described in [CLUSTER NODES](../commands/cluster-nodes.md).
```

    ```
    $ redis-cli -c cluster nodes
    ```

    In the output you will see the newly added node as a replica (slave). For example, we have added a Valkey node with the IP address `172.22.0.8:6379`. The cluster nodes list now includes a new entry as follows:

    ```
    a98d5bac59672597b8509f24970e413002f896b6 172.22.0.8:6379@16379 slave 58061fb2836bdb2f5a0973e1ccfd74a66166f329 0 1725451086000 3 connected
    ```
    
7. Verify that the your newly added Valkey node is recognized as a replica by running the `INFO REPLICATION` command. The output displays information about the node's primary.

> 8. Start the `valkey-cli` in your new Valkey container and enter the following command to promote it to be primary. [Cluster Failover](https://valkey.io/commands/cluster-failover/) provides additional information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Start the `valkey-cli` in your new Valkey container and enter the following command to promote it to be primary. [CLUSTER FAILOVER](../commands/cluster-failover.md) provides additional information.
```

Author: Change was made.

   ```
   docker exec -it <valkey_container_name> valkey-cli
   valkey 127.0.0.1:6379> cluster failover
   OK
   ```

> 9. Use the `cluster nodes` command to display the cluster state and verify that your new Valkey node is now a new primary.

Reviewer: Write commands in uppercase.

```suggestion
9. Use the `CLUSTER NODES` command to display the cluster state and verify that your new Valkey node is now a new primary.
```

Author: Change has been made.
